A Chilean puzzle

Among Chilean adults, 54 percent are functionally illiterate. This implies: They cannot read a sign, put their Date of Birth on a form or calculate nutritional content in a clearly marked can of cookies. If these trends continue, ageing populations and declining fertility will imply that Western literacy peaked in 2014; by 2050, we expect half as many literate adults in the OECD countries compared to 2014\. That loss of human capital may prove devastating. Innovation is the engine of growth and development around the world, and halving the human capital in the world may reduce innovation to a crawl.

This last part of the article dives into the curious case of Chile, a country in South America that abuts Argentina, is \~2700 miles long (Boston to Miami–and back again) and 200 miles wide (Boston to New York). We are interested in Chile because the fraction of functionally illiterate adults has not changed between 2014 and 2023–in fact it has increased. Yet, over the same period, we will show that younger adults in the workforce were much more likely to have gone to college and significantly increased their performance in school. We will demonstrate that improvements in test scores in school and large increases in college enrollment *have* translated into increases in adult literacy. We will do this, in each case, by “tracking cohorts” over time and seeing them as they enter the PIACC.

But first the facts. 

On March 11th, 1990, Chile’s brutal dictatorship led by Pinochet came to an end. In that year, XX% of adult Chileans had ever attended college, and college enrollment in the relevant age-cohort of 18-24 was XX%. Between 1990 and 2025, total college enrollment increased from \~245,000 to \~1.45 million, an almost 6-fold increase. In percentage terms, in 1990, 12.8% of children between the ages of 18 and 24 were enrolled in college. By 2000, this had increased to 22%, by 2015 to 37.4%, and by 2025 it had increased further to 47%. Even more astonishing is the increase when we allow for the possibility that older people are also enrolling in college. One way to see this, gross enrollment in college, which is the total number of children enrolled in college as a fraction of the number of children between the ages of 18 and 24 increased from 14.4% in 1990 to *more than 100%* in 2025\. (In case you are wondering, 32% of children in the U.S. in the same age group were enrolled in college in 1990 and by 2022, that number had increased to 39%.)

Between 1990 and 2025, not only were children more likely to enroll in college, but they were also performing much better in school even before they got there. One way we know this is by looking at how 15-year olds performed in yet another test given by the OECD (the same organization that administers the PIACC) called the Program for International Student Assessment, which tests children in Mathematics, Reading and Science in multiple countries since 2001\. The test has a mean of 500 across all the children tested and it has a standard deviation of 100\. In percentile terms, a child scoring 700 will be at the 95th percentile compared to a child who scores 500\. 

In 2000, Chilean children were scoring 410 on the reading test, which put them significantly behind the U.S. and the OECD average. By 2015, the Chileans had increased significantly, even as there were no changes in either the U.S. or the OECD, effectively halving the gap. Then, by 2022, they fell back again, but these declines were much smaller compared to the earlier gains. By this time, the Chileans were closer to an unchanging U.S. and much closer to the OECD average which also declined over this period. Again, in percentile terms, Chile went from the 18th percentile of the OECD score distribution to the 34th percentile before falling back again to the 30th percentile. 

For readers in the U.S. there are two other ways to benchmark this increase. Shortly after one one of us (the youngster in this group) moved to DC, the city was agog with a new school administrator called Michelle Rhee, who was working miracles in the school system. Later, the gains were disputed, but the interesting point is that even if we took the gains as given, at the height of the miracle, they amounted to 0.1 standard deviations. That can mean a lot in a child’s life, but it is one-fifth of the gains that Chile saw between 2000 and 2022\. A better comparison is with the Mississippi miracle (Americans seem to be so despondent with their schooling system that any improvement is thought to be a miracle….), where reading scores increased by 0.25 standard deviations between 2013 and 2014, or half the size of the Chilean improvement. An exact comparison is with the gains in Mississippi's reading scores between 1992 and 2024 of 0.5 to 0.56 standard deviations, which took it from 41st among 41 participating states in the NEAP to 9th across all states over the same period. 

{A note for the purists: We could debate the size of the increase in the PISA scores. For instance, even though the relative gaps across countries are comparable, comparisons across early and late rounds can be contested due to changes in the test. However, very similar increases are also seen in Chile’s own SIMCE scores which is based on exams of all children in the country in Grades 4 and 8).

We can now think of tracking these changes through to the adult cohorts. The idea is the following. PIACC was administered to children between the ages of 16 and 65 in Chile in 2014 and then again in 2023\. Take someone who was between the ages of 18 to 24 in 1990\. In 2014, they would be between the ages of 42 and 48, and then in 2023, we can find them again between the ages of 51 and 57\. In the PIACC, XX% of those aged 42 to 48 had gone to college in 2014 and of those aged 51 to 57, YY% had gone to college in 2023; these numbers roughly match up (as they should). Among this cohort, XX% are functionally illiterate (PL1 or below) in 2014 and YY% are functionally illiterate in 2023\. Thus, among a cohort of Chileans who were quite unlikely to attend college, XX% were functionally illiterate in their mid-40s, and this number increased with cognitive decline over age to reach YY% for the same group as they aged to their mid-50s.

We can now do *exactly the same comparison* for Chileans who were between the ages of 18 and 24 in 2000–by 2023, they are between 41 and 47\. Tracking them to the PIACC, XX% have gone to college, reflecting the sharp rise in college enrolment over the years. Yet, ZZ% of them remain functionally illiterate–these numbers have barely budged. Perhaps this comparison is incorrect because the adults who are functionally illiterate are precisely those who have never had the chance to attend college, and instead, the increase in college enrolment should show up in the average PIACC scores across these cohorts. Again, the numbers are small. For our “low” college enrollment cohort, PIACC scores on average are XXX in 2014 and YYY in 2023; for our high college enrollment cohort, this has increased to ZZZ.

These comparisons maintain strict comparability by age (between 41 and 48), but if we are willing to drop the strict age comparability, other comparisons are also possible–and they show exactly the same thing. For instance, 37.4% of children between the ages of 18-24 in 2015 had gone to college. In 2023, they would have been 26 to 32\. Among this cohort, XX% have gone to college, functional illiteracy (PL1 or below) stands at XX% and average scores are ZZZ. 

What about the improvement in PISA and SIMCE scores? We can try the same “trick” of tracking low and high performing cohorts over time. For instance, a child taking the PISA test in 2000 will be 15 years old in 2000 (by definition), 29 year old in 2014 and 38 year old in 2023\. This child will have had a low PISA score. A child taking the PISA test in 2009 will be 15 year old in 2009, 20 years old in 2014 and exactly 29 years old in 2023\. So, we can compare two 29 year olds in 2014 and 2019, and, if PISA scores translate into PIACC, we should expect a drop in functional illiteracy. We *do* find that drop we are looking for, but the numbers are disappointingly small. The fraction of PL1 adults declines from XX% to YY% and average scores for these 29 year olds increase from XXX to XXX. One of the sharpest increases we have seen in test scores in schools appear to have dwindled into very little by the time these children are reaching take-off in their careers and families.

What is to blame? We don’t know, but we should rule out some usual suspects. Some people will say that this is due to a rise in immigration (Chile did see a sharp increase in Haitian and Venezuelan migrants) during this time. And yes, it is true that “non-natives” have lower scores than natives in Chile, but the adjustment makes virtually no difference. Indeed, adjustments for *all kinds of changes* in population composition have very small effects on the overall message. 

The TL;DR remains that most Chileans are functionally illiterate. It is clear that the education departments are worried about this. They have worked hard to improve scores in schools and Chile has seen some of the sharpest improvements in schooling quality anywhere in the world. They have also worked hard to expand access to college, with a 6-fold increase in college-going over a period that the numbers in the U.S. have remained stagnant. 

Yet, this has not been enough. 

